Source: CLINICAL GUIDELINES FOR THE MANAGEMENT OF CORONARY HEART DISEASE
URL: https://extranet.who.int/ncdccs/Data/MUS_D1_chd.pdf



============================================================[Page 5]
3. PATHOPHYSIOLOGY
Myocardial ischaemia occurs when myocardial oxygen delivery cannot meet
metabolic myocardial demands. This discrepancy is termed supply-demand
mismatch. Although this term is overly simplistic, myocardial oxygen delivery is
mostly determined by the oxygen-carrying capacity of blood and coronary flow.
In normal coronary arteries, coronary blood flow can increase three to fivefold in
response to exercise. This increase, termed coronary flow reserve, occurs mostly
through decreased resistance in coronary microcirculation. Significant
atherosclerotic plaquing in epicardial coronary arteries (> 75% cross-sectional
area) results in a drop in blood pressure across the stenotic lesion. Coronary
arterioles dilate to compensate for the reduced distal perfusion pressure,
maintaining normal resting coronary blood flow. Consequently, at rest, most
patients with significant coronary artery stenosis obstructions have no ischaemia
and therefore no angina. During exercise, however, the capacity of coronary
arterioles to dilate further is limited, and the myocardial oxygen demand soon
outstrips the supply, resulting in ischaemia, followed usually by angina.
Acute coronary syndromes share a common pathophysiology: acute rupture
(fissuration or ulceration) of a lipid-rich intracoronary atheromatous plaque, with
subsequent mobilisation of a sequence of inflammatory and thrombotic cascades
culminating in the formation of thrombus.
The possible triggers of acute plaque rupture are: sheer stress, inflammation and
increased neurohormonal tone. Certain plaques are more susceptible to acute
rupture than others – for example those which are eccentric, with a lipid-rich
vulnerable core, a high content of active inflammatory cells, and a thin fibrous
cap. Rupture of the plaque (ulceration/fissuration), with exposure of the highly
thrombogenic contents to the bloodstream, initiates a cascade of cytokine release,
inflammatory cell activation and platelet activation, with resulting platelet
Ministry of Health and Quality of Life/Mauritius Institute of Health/World Health Organisation 5

[Page 6 — context]
aggregation and formation of occluding thrombus. As a result, the patient may
present with one or more of the following:
1. If the vessel lumen is completely occluded or if inadequate collateralisation is
present, transmural myocardial injury and subsequent infarction occurs,
with ST elevation (or new left bundle branch block) most commonly seen on
the electrocardiogram (ECG).
2. If following plaque rupture, however, incomplete occlusion of the lumen
occurs or sufficient collateral flow exists, ischaemia or nontransmural
injury results, with or without injury.
3. If ischaemia occurs without injury (i.e, with negative serial enzyme
measurements), the clinical condition is termed unstable angina (UA). If cell
injury is demonstrated by serial measurements of cardiac enzymes, non-ST
elevation MI is diagnosed. (See Figure 1 below).
Figure 1: Schematic Representation of Relationship between chronic Coronary
Artery Disease and Acute Coronary Syndromes
CORONARY ARTERY DISEASE
Stable Coronary Artery Disease Acute Coronary Syndromes
No ST-elevation on ECG ST-elevation on ECG
Stable Angina Unstable Non-ST ST-Elevation
Angina Elevation MI MI
Non-Q wave Q wave Q wave Non Q wave
MI MI MI MI
Ministry of Health and Quality of Life/Mauritius Institute of Health/World Health Organisation 6

[Page 9]
5.2 CLINICAL EXAMINATION AND INVESTIGATIONS
5.2.1 Clinical Examination
Often normal.
To look for confirmatory information, i.e., hypertension, peripheral artery disease,
xanthelasma, tendinous xanthomata, tobacco-stained fingers or teeth. Episodic
ischaemia alters left ventricular compliance, thus a transient S4, S3, may be heard
during an acute ischaemic episode.
5.2.2 Investigations
(i) Basic screening :
• Fasting blood glucose
• Serum lipids including high density lipoproteins (HDL) and
triglycerides
• Full blood count
• Blood urea and electrolytes
• Serum urates
(ii) ECG:
• Often normal in the absence of myocardial infarction or left ventricular
hypertrophy.
• An ECG during an episode of angina may show transient ST
depression, T wave inversion or ventricular arrythmias (VPB; isolated
or in runs, monomorph or polymorph). An ambulatory ECG (Holter)
may demonstrate ischaemic episodes with or without symptoms ‘Silent
Ischaemia’.
Ministry of Health and Quality of Life/Mauritius Institute of Health/World Health Organisation 9

[Page 10 — context]
(iii) Echocardiogram:
• May demonstrate wall motion abnormalities suggestive of ischaemia
or of infarction.
(iv) Exercise Stress Testing (EST):
• Is a sensitive and informative examination, particularly useful in the
detection and quantification of chronic ischaemic heart disease in
patients who are at increased risk.
Indications:
• Differential diagnosis of chest pain, i.e., evaluation of patients with
symptoms suggestive of IHD.
• Assessment of the threshold of angina in patient with known IHD.
• Evaluation of therapy for angina
• Evaluation of the asymptomatic patient over 40 yrs who has multiple
risk factors for IHD.
Contraindications:
• Recent acute MI (4-6 weeks), except for submaximal effort.
• Unstable angina
• Rapid ventricular or atrial arrhythmia
• Advanced atrio-ventricular (A-V) block
• Decompensated, uncontrolled congestive heart failure
• Acute noncardiac illness
• Severe aortic stenosis, hypertrophic obstructive cardiomyopathy
(HOCM)
• BP more than 170/100 before onset of exercise
Ministry of Health and Quality of Life/Mauritius Institute of Health/World Health Organisation 10

[Page 12]
5.4 MANAGEMENT
The treatment of chronic ischaemic heart disease has two major goals:
(i) to prevent myocardial infarction (MI) and death, thereby improving life
expectancy.
(ii) to reduce symptoms of angina and the occurrence of ischaemia, which
should improve quality of life.
Medical therapy with aggressive cardiovascular risk factor modification is the
cornerstone of therapy for chronic ischaemic heart disease. This holds true for
patients being treated either medically or with coronary revascularization. The
treatment strategies for chronic stable angina is separated into two important
divisions:
(1) anti-anginal therapy and
(2) education and risk factor modification.
5.4.1 Anti-anginal therapy
Conditions that exacerbate and provoke angina should be considered; these
include medications such as vasodilators, excessive thyroid replacement therapy,
and vasoconstrictors. Medical problems such as profound anaemia, uncontrolled
hypertension, hyperthyroidism, and hypoxemia should also be considered.
Primary cardiac disorders such as tachy-and brady-arrhythmias, valvular heart
disease (especially aortic stenosis), and hypertrophic cardiomyopathy may also
exacerbate angina pectoris and should be excluded. Careful attention to history,
thorough physical examination, and selection of appropriate laboratory and other
diagnostic studies can help identify these clinical conditions.
Ministry of Health and Quality of Life/Mauritius Institute of Health/World Health Organisation 12

[Page 13]
β-blockers
β-blockers decrease heart rate, contractility and arterial pressure, resulting in
decreased myocardial oxygen demand. In patients with chronic stable exertional
angina, β-blockers decrease heart rate and blood pressure during exercise, and the
onset of angina (ischaemic threshold) is delayed or avoided. Various types of β-
blockers are available for the treatment of hypertension and angina (Table 1). All
β-blockers appear to be equally effective in reducing angina pectoris. In the
treatment of stable angina, it is conventional to adjust the dose of these drugs to
reduce the resting heart rate to 50-60 beats per minute.
Table 1: Properties of β-blockers in clinical use
Drugs Selectivity Partial agonist Usual dose for
activity angina
Propranolol None No 20-80 mg bid
Metoprolol β1 No 50-200 mg bid
Atenolol β1 No 50-200 mg bid
Nadolol None No 40-80 mg qd
Timolol None No 10 mg bid
Acebutolol β1 Yes 200-600 mg bid
Betaxolol β1 No 10-20 mg qd
Bisoprolol β1 No 10 mg qd
Esmolol β1 No 50-300 mg/kg/min
(intravenous)
Labetalol* None No 200-600 mg bid
Carvedilol* None No 12.5-50 mg bid
* combined α- and β-blocker.
bid- twice a day ; qd – every day; tid – three times a day
Ministry of Health and Quality of Life/Mauritius Institute of Health/World Health Organisation 13

[Page 14]
The absolute cardiac contraindications for the use of β-blockers are severe
bradycardia, pre-existing high degree atrioventricular block, sick sinus syndrome,
and severe decompensated left ventricular failure (β-blockers have now been
shown to reduce total mortality in patients with compensated heart failure). β-
blockers should also be avoided in patients with pure vasospastic angina
(Prinzmetal angina) because these agents may induce coronary vasospasm from
unopposed α-receptor activity. Asthma and bronchospastic disease, severe
depression, and severe peripheral vascular disease are relative contraindications.
Most diabetic patients tolerate β-blockers, although these agents should be used
cautiously in patients who require insulin. In the absence of contraindications, β-
blockers are preferred as initial therapy. The evidence for this approach is
strongest in patients with a history of prior MI, for which this class of drugs has
been shown to reduce mortality.
Calcium antagonists
Calcium antagonists effectively treat hypertension and angina pectoris. These
agents are commonly divided into the dihydropyridine and nondihydropyridine
classes (Table 2). Calcium antagonists decrease coronary vascular resistance and
increase coronary blood flow. All of these agents cause dilatation of the
epicardial coronary vessels and the microcirculation arteriolar resistance vessels.
Dilatation of the epicardial coronary arteries is the principal mechanism that
allows calcium antagonists to relieve vasospastic angina. Calcium antagonists
also concurrently decrease myocardial oxygen demand, primarily by reduction of
systemic vascular resistance and reduction in arterial pressure. In addition,
certain calcium antagonists (verapamil and diltiazem) reduce myocardial oxygen
demand by decreasing heart rate and contractility.
Ministry of Health and Quality of Life/Mauritius Institute of Health/World Health Organisation 14

[Page 15 — context]
Table 2: Properties of calcium antagonists in clinical use
Drugs Usual dose Duration of Side effects
action
Dihydropyridines
Nifedipine Immediate release: 30-90 Short Hypotension,
mg daily orally dizziness, flushing,
Slow release: 30-180 mg nausea, constipation,
orally edema
Amlodipine 5-10 mg qd Long Headache, edema
Felodipine 5-10 mg qd Long Headache, edema
Isradipine 2.5-10 mg bid Medium Headache, fatigue
Nicardipine 20-40 mg tid Short Headache, dizziness,
flushing, edema
Non-dihydropyridines
Bepridil 200-400 mg qd Long Arrhythmias,
dizziness, nausea
Diltiazem Immediate release: 30-80 Short Hypotension,
mg 4 times daily dizziness, flushing,
bradycardia, edema
Slow release: 120-320 mg Long
qd
Verapamil Immediate release: 80-160 Short Hypotension,
mg tid myocardial
Slow release: 120-480 mg Long depression, heart
qd failure, edema,
bradycardia
bid – twice a day; qd – every day; tid - three times a day
Short-acting dihydropyridine calcium antagonists have the potential to enhance
the risk of adverse cardiac events and should be avoided. Long-acting calcium
antagonists of the dihydro-and nondihydropyridine class relieve angina and are
appropriate initial therapy in patients with contraindications to β-blockers. They
can also be substituted for β-blockers in patients who develop unacceptable side
effects or can be used in combination with β-blockers when initial β-blockers
therapy is unsuccessful.
Ministry of Health and Quality of Life/Mauritius Institute of Health/World Health Organisation 15

[Page 20]
control, and smoking cessation may provide modest increases in HDL cholesterol.
Recently, a randomized trial comparing the fibrate gemfibrozil to placebo
demonstrated reduced cardiovascular mortality in patients with CAD and an
isolated HDL cholesterol of less than 35 mg/dL.
5.4.2 Education and Risk Factor Reduction
Identification and treatment of coronary disease risk factors in patients with
angina is necessary for optimal secondary prevention of chronic ischaemic heart
disease. Established and modifiable coronary disease risk factors, such as
cigarette smoking, hypertension, diabetes mellitus, and hyperlipidemia, are
common in patients with chronic ischaemic heart disease. These risk factors are
readily amenable to modification, and their treatment can affect clinical outcome
favourably.
Studies show that the risk of death from CAD is inversely proportional to
education. It is therefore important for the physician to assess the patient’s
baseline understanding of his or her condition and to appropriately educate the
patient and his or her family on the pathology and pathophysiology of the disease,
prognosis of condition, and treatment and risk factor reduction options.
Obesity
Obesity is a common condition associated with an increased risk for coronary
artery disease and mortality. Obesity is also associated with and contributes to
other coronary risk factors, including high blood pressure, glucose intolerance,
low levels of HDL cholesterol, and elevated triglycerides. Thus, much of the
increased CAD risk associated with obesity is mediated by these factors. Weight
reduction in obese patients with coronary disease can likely reduce the risk of
future events because weight reduction will reduce other modifiable risk factors
and reduce the increased myocardial oxygen demand imposed by obesity. Weight
Ministry of Health and Quality of Life/Mauritius Institute of Health/World Health Organisation 20

[Page 21]
reduction is therefore recommended in all obese patients with ischaemic heart
disease. Strategies to improve weight reduction include:
a. lowering total caloric intake,
b. eating foods low in cholesterol and saturated fat and high in fibre and
unsaturated fat, and
c. exercise training.
Exercise
Exercise training improves blood pressure, glucose control, lipid profile, exercise
endurance, and objective measures of ischaemia. In addition, exercise training
may lead to changes in weight and a sense of well-being. For these reasons, a
regular exercise program should be part of a multifactorial intervention program
in patients with stable chronic ischaemic heart disease.
5.5 FOLLOW-UP
Patients who are successfully treated for chronic ischaemic heart disease should
have follow-up evaluation every 4 to 12 months. A more precise interval cannot
be recommended because many factors influence the length of follow-up period.
Five questions must be answered regularly during the follow-up evaluation:
(1) Has the patient decreased the level of physical activity?
(2) Have the patient’s anginal symptoms increased in frequency and become
more severe since the last visit?
(3) How well is the patient tolerating therapy?
(4) How successful has the patient been in reducing modifiable risk factors
and improving knowledge about ischaemic heart disease?
(5) Has the patient developed any new comorbid illnesses or has the severity
or treatment of known comorbid illnesses worsened the patient’s angina?
Ministry of Health and Quality of Life/Mauritius Institute of Health/World Health Organisation 21

[Page 22 — context]
Patients who cannot reliably identify and report changes in their status or who
need more support with their treatment or risk factor reduction should be seen
more frequently.
5.6 INDICATIONS FOR REFERRAL TO CARDIOLOGIST
In general, most patients with chronic stable angina initially present to their
primary care physician. The preliminary diagnosis, risk stratification, medical
management, risk factor modification, and patient education are performed under
direction of the primary care physician. Patients with worsening anginal
symptoms (Canadian Cardiovascular Society Angina Class III or IV) or
presenting with any acute coronary syndrome should be referred to a cardiologist.
Furthermore, patients with an increased risk for adverse cardiac events, left
ventricular ejection fraction (LVEF) ≤ 35%, high-risk exercise treadmill score,
multiple large ischaemic zones on stress imaging, successfully resuscitated from
sudden cardiac death, sustained ventricular tachycardia, significant angina
pectoris symptoms despite medical treatment should be considered for coronary
angiography and evaluated by a cardiology specialist. Those patients who are co-
managed by their primary care physician and cardiologist may alternate follow-up
evaluations, provided that communication among physicians is excellent and all
appropriate issues are addressed at each visit.
Ministry of Health and Quality of Life/Mauritius Institute of Health/World Health Organisation 22

[Page 23]
5.7 KEY POINTS
• Angina pectoris is the most common initial manifestation of chronic ischaemic heart
disease.
• A mismatch between coronary blood flow and myocardial oxygen demand results in
myocardial ischaemia.
• Medical treatment of patients with chronic ischaemic heart disease should include:
aspirin and anti-anginals, β-blocker and blood pressure control, cholesterol lowering
and cigarette cessation, dietary modification and diabetes assessment, and exercise
and education.
• Coronary angiography should be considered in patients with chronic angina and any
of the following:
1. Left ventricular ejection fraction less than 35%
2. High risk exercise treadmill score
3. Multiple large ischaemic zones on stress imaging (especially if anterior
distribution),
4. Successful resuscitation from sudden cardiac death,
5. Sustained ventricular tachycardia, and
6. Significant angina pectoris despite medical treatment.
• Coronary artery bypass graft (CABG) should be considered in patients with chronic
angina and any of the following:
1. Significant left main disease,
2. Three vessel coronary artery disease (CAD) and depressed left ventricular
functions, and
3. Multi-vessel CAD that includes the proximal segment of the left anterior
descending (LAD).
• Percutaneous coronary intervention (PCI) may be considered in patients who have
multi-vessel CAD (including the proximal LAD), have anatomy suitable for catheter-
based technique, do not have diabetes, and have normal left ventricular function.
• Coronary revascularization with either PCI or CABG may be considered in
appropriate patients with single or multi-vessel CAD who have failed medical
management of chronic angina pectoris.
Ministry of Health and Quality of Life/Mauritius Institute of Health/World Health Organisation 23

[Page 24 — context]
6. ACUTE CORONARY SYNDROMES
Acute coronary syndromes share a common pathophysiology - rupture of a
vulnerable plaque with subsequent activation of dynamic inflammatory,
thrombotic and ischaemic cascades.
Acute coronary syndromes (ACS) may be divided into two broad categories:
1. non-ST elevation ACS: unstable angina (UA)
non-ST elevation MI and
2. ST elevation myocardial infarction (MI).
Acute non ST elevation coronary syndrome without injury (ie, with negative
serial enzyme measurements) is termed unstable angina (UA).
Acute non ST elevation coronary syndrome with cell injury, demonstrated by
serial measurements of cardiac enzymes is termed non-ST elevation MI.
6.2 UNSTABLE ANGINA AND NON ST ELEVATION ACUTE MYOCARDIAL
INFARCTION
6.1.1 Clinical presentation
Non ST elevation acute coronary syndrome (unstable angina and non-ST
elevation myocardial infarction) is defined as a change in the status of a patient’s
angina. It includes the following presentations: (a) new-onset angina, (b) angina
of increasing severity, frequency, duration and lesser or slower response to
rest and/or sublingual nitrates, (c) angina occuring at rest for the first time
and (d) post infarction angina.
Ministry of Health and Quality of Life/Mauritius Institute of Health/World Health Organisation 24

[Page 26]
Physical Examination
Physical examination during acute coronary syndromes may be relatively
unremarkable. The patient may appear anxious or diaphoretic (cold sweats).
Tachycardia or bradycardia, as well as extremes of blood pressure, may be
present, but vital signs are often normal.
Heart failure or valvular regurgitation are unusual acute consequences of non-ST
elevation ACS, but may be concurrently present in patients with underlying
cardiac disease.
Signs of peripheral vascular disease, such as carotid bruits or diminished
extremity pulses, should increase the suspicion of atherosclerotic coronary
disease.
Physical examination is perhaps most useful to diagnose non-ischaemic causes
of pain, such as costochondritis, pneumonia, obstructive pulmonary disease,
pericarditis, aortic dissection, upper gastrointestinal disease etc.
Laboratory Testing
Complete blood count, electrolytes, renal function tests, and chest x-ray are useful
to diagnose other causes of symptoms and to evaluate for concurrent medical
conditions, such as renal insufficiency. Clotting times should be obtained to
exclude bleeding diatheses prior to potential initiation of antithrombotic therapies.
.
The cornerstones of diagnostic testing, however, are ECG analysis and
measurements of serum cardiac markers.
Ministry of Health and Quality of Life/Mauritius Institute of Health/World Health Organisation 26

[Page 27 — context]
ECG analysis
A baseline ECG, preferably during the chest pain, is essential in any risk
stratification for the purpose of management.
Non ST elevation acute coronary syndromes are subdivided into
1. those without ECG changes, i.e a normal ECG (about 40% of patients)
2. those whose ECG shows ischemic changes (biphasic or inverted T waves, ST-
depression, and/or transient ST elevation – 60%)
The following ECG abnormalities are predictive of an incrementally higher risk:
transient T wave inversion, transient ST elevation, ST depression, and transient
both ST elevation and depression.
Transient or dynamic ECG changes are suggestive of ischaemia, and therefore
the need for serial ECGs in the first few hours after presentation especially when
pain persists, when pain recurs after initial improvement, or when pain subsides
and initial ECG abnormalities disappear..
Development of persistent ST elevation or left bundle branch block should
prompt urgent evaluation for thrombolytics or percutaneous intervention.
Serum cardiac markers
Various serum markers have demonstrated utility as markers of myocardial injury
(infarction), including serum creatine kinase (CK)-MB and troponin I or T.
One main advantage of using both markers is their different time course: while
either may detect early injury, CK-MB values typically return to normal by 1 to 2
days, while troponin levels usually remain elevated for 5 to 14 days.When both
Ministry of Health and Quality of Life/Mauritius Institute of Health/World Health Organisation 27

[Page 31]
Drug treatment
A. Intravenous nitroglycerin (GTN, ISDN)- for 24 hrs. If asymptomatic after 24 hrs -
oral long acting nitrates
B. Beta blockers (if not contraindicated)
C. Calcium antagonists (verapamil, diltiazem) if beta-blockers contraindicated
N.B. Nifedipine only if associated with β-blockers
D. Narcotic analgesics for pain refractory to antianginal drugs
E. Heparin- bolus of 70-80 units/kg + infusion of 15-18 units/kg/hour.
KPTT should be checked every 6 hrs until therapeutic level of 1.5 – 2.0 (50-70
sec)
Low molecular weight heparin (enoxaparin) – 1 mg/kg bd for 48 hours (or more if
angioplasty contemplated)
F. Aspirin 150-300 mg od
Ticlopidine if aspirin contra-indicated - 250 mg bd
Glycoprotein 11b- 111a receptor inhibitors (Reopro, Integrelin)
G. Lipid lowering therapy
Unless contraindicated, all patients with suspected ACS should be given aspirin
(150–300 mg orally).
If pain is present, nitroglycerin tablets should be given sublingually, with
subsequent further sublingual, transdermal, or intravenous doses as necessary.
If pain is not completely relieved with nitrates, intravenous opiates such as
morphine sulphate should be considered.
If oesophageal or gastric pain is suspected, an oral antacid can be given as well.
Heart rate, blood pressure, and rhythm should be monitored closely.
Ministry of Health and Quality of Life/Mauritius Institute of Health/World Health Organisation 31

[Page 32]
If there is significant hypertension (e.g., blood pressure > 170/100 mmHg),
tachycardia, persistent chest pain, or ischaemic ECG changes, intravenous beta-
blockers should be administered in the absence of contraindications.
Oral beta-blockade (eg., atenolol 25–50 mg once daily) should be given to all
patients without contraindications, even when vital signs are normal.
If the clinical suspicion of ACS is quite low, then the above treatment combined
with observation in a monitored setting may be adequate.
For patients at higher risk, and for all patients with persistent pain, recurrent pain,
or ECG changes, further antithrombotic therapy is indicated, consisting of heparin
with or without a glycoprotein receptor inhibitor .
Antithrombotic and Anticoagulant Therapy
The mainstays of antithrombotic and anticoagulant therapy have been aspirin and
unfractionated heparin. Two newer classes of agents, however, show substantial
benefit in the treatment of non-ST elevation ACS. These are (a) low molecular
weight heparins and (b) glycoprotein IIb/IIIa receptor inhibitor
Low molecular weight heparins
Treatment with the low molecular weight enoxaparin (Lovenox) reduces
significantly the combined endpoint of death, myocardial infarction, and recurrent
angina or urgent revascularization, compared with unfractionated heparin.
Dosing is 1 mg/kg subcutaneously twice daily, started on admission and typically
continued until in-hospital risk stratification, revascularization, or hospital
discharge.
Ministry of Health and Quality of Life/Mauritius Institute of Health/World Health Organisation 32

[Page 33 — context]
Practical advantages of this therapy are simplified dosing and administration,
absence of coagulation profile monitoring, and potential cost savings.
Glycoprotein IIb/IIIa receptor antagonists
Platelet glycoprotein (GP) IIb/IIIa receptors represent the final common pathway
for platelet aggregation, via fibrin binding and cross-linking of the GP IIb/IIIa
receptor. Antibody fragment (abciximab) and peptide (eptifibatide, tirofiban)
antagonists to the GP IIb/IIIa receptor have been developed, which demonstrate
powerful in vitro and in vivo inhibition of platelet aggregation.
Use of GP IIb/IIIa antagonists, therefore, should be considered in addition to
aspirin and heparin in any individual suspected of having a non-ST elevation
ACS, especially if high-risk features are present, such as elevated serum enzymes,
persistent chest pain, or ST depression . In this setting, lower doses of intravenous
heparin are indicated, with goal of prothrombin time 1.5 to 2 times control.
Contraindications due to bleeding risk are similar to those for thrombolytics. The
cost of those drugs is still, however, very prohibitive.
In-hospital risk stratification
If chest pain persists or recurs on the medical and antithrombotic therapies
described, in association with high clinical suspicion or objective evidence of
ischemia such as positive serum markers or ECG changes, then cardiac
catheterization is typically indicated.
However, while this may occur in a significant proportion of patients, many
patients with non-ST elevation ACS can be made pain-free with nitrates, β-
blockers, opiates, and antithrombotic therapy.
Ministry of Health and Quality of Life/Mauritius Institute of Health/World Health Organisation 33

[Page 34]
Additionally, others may have recurrent chest pain, but with low clinical
suspicion and no objective evidence of ischemia. In these groups of patients, in-
hospital risk stratification is indicated after an initial period of medical
stabilization (typically 18–48 hours).
Revascularization
If cardiac catheterization is performed, either due to refractory ischaemia or as
part of risk-stratification as described above, then revascularization should be
considered if suitable coronary anatomy is present.
The choice of percutaneous v/s surgical revascularization depends on both the
coronary anatomy and individual patient characteristics and preferences.
All patients should receive maximal preventive therapy.
6.1.5 Follow-up and Secondary Prevention
Many interventions have shown utility in the secondary prevention of ACS,
including control of cardiac risk factors such as smoking, hypertension,
hyperlipidemia, and diabetes, regular use of aspirin, use of beta-blockers and
angiotensin-converting-enzyme inhibitors in selected patients, and adherence to
cardioprotective diets containing n-3-omega fatty acids, monounsaturated fats,
and antioxidants .
All of these interventions act by reducing the inflammatory and thrombotic
milieu of the atherosclerotic vessel.
Ministry of Health and Quality of Life/Mauritius Institute of Health/World Health Organisation 34

[Page 35 — context]
6.1.6 Indications for referral to Cardiologist
Patients with worsening anginal symptoms or presenting with any acute coronary
syndrome should be referred to a cardiologist.
Those patients who are co-managed by their primary care physicians and
cardiologist may alternate follow-up evaluations, provided that communication
among physicians is excellent and all appropriate issues are addressed at each
visit.
Ministry of Health and Quality of Life/Mauritius Institute of Health/World Health Organisation 35

[Page 38]
6.2.2 Examination and Investigations
1. Physical Examination
The rapid, risk-stratification orientated physical examination should be directed
towards identification of:
1. haemodynamic instability, and
2. pulmonary congestion
New systolic murmurs are particularly important, suggesting the presence of
ischaemic mitral regurgitation (due to papillary muscle dysfunction or more
dramatically due to papillary muscle rupture) or an acquired ventricular septal
defect (due to rupture of the infarcted area of the septum)
There is no diagnostic physical sign of acute MI. The clinical appearance is
variable (from the healthy-looking athlete carrying his own suitcase to the
somnolent patient in cardiogenic shock). However, to detect complications of
acute MI, physical examination—in particular, auscultation of the lungs and the
heart—should be done repeatedly every day in all patients.
2. Electrocardiographic Findings
The electrocardiogram serves as the hallmark for diagnosis of acute MI because
characteristic ST, T, and Q-wave changes are detectable in most of the patients.
In the early stage of acute coronary occlusion (phase 1 or hyperacute phase) giant
positive T waves appear with taller than normal R waves .
In phase 2 (acute phase, more commonly seen at hospital admission), ST-segment
elevation is evident with a decrease in amplitude of the R wave, followed by
Ministry of Health and Quality of Life/Mauritius Institute of Health/World Health Organisation 38

[Page 39 — context]
pathologic Q-wave development that lasts 0.04 seconds or more and reaches 25%
of the amplitude of the R wave (pathologic Q- wave, phase 3, when cell necrosis
occurs over hours to days).
Over time, the ST segment returns to normal with T wave inversion (terminal
negative T wave); the R wave may be lost as a result of transmural necrosis and
may be replaced by a QS wave (phase 4, chronic phase). The Q wave or QS wave
persists, whereas the T wave may return to positive.
ST-wave elevation may persist in cases of left ventricular dyskinesis or aneurysm.
The electrocardiographic leads not representing the infarcted area may show
inverse, reciprocal ST-segment alterations.
A new left bundle branch block may be present and, if it persists, usually
indicates large anterior wall infarction.
The diagnosis of acute infarction in patients with acute chest pain who present
with left bundle branch block is highly probable when there is ST-segment
elevation of 1 mm or more concordant with the QRS complex, ST-segment
depression of 1 mm or more in lead V1, V2, or V3, and ST-segment elevation of
5 mm or more discordant to the QRS complex. When possible, the current ECG
tracing should be compared with previous records.
Determination of myocardial infarct localization according to ECG leads is listed
in Table 5.
Ministry of Health and Quality of Life/Mauritius Institute of Health/World Health Organisation 39

[Page 43]
Once the patient arrives at the hospital, initial evaluation of the patient’s history,
coronary risk factors, physical signs, 12-lead ECG tracing, possible
contraindications for reperfusion therapy, and steps for treatment should be
initiated within 20 to 30 minutes (“door-to-needle time”). The presence of a
special thrombolysis nurse might reduce the delay in instituting reperfusion
therapy for patients with acute MI.
In the emergency ward the patient should immediately receive aspirin in
chewable form, oxygen by nasal prongs or masks (blood gases may be checked,
especially in patients with chronic pulmonary diseases), and sublingual nitrates
(unless systolic arterial pressure is less than 90 mmHg or heart rate is less than 50
or greater than 100 beats per minute).
The patient should be monitored and have bed rest for 12 to 24 hours as life-
threatening arrhythmias, reinfarction, mechanical complications, and death occur
most frequently within the first 24 hours after acute MI.
Reperfusion Therapy
The main goal in the treatment of patients with acute MI is to reduce the extent of
irreversible myocardial tissue damage and necrosis.
Fibrinolytic therapy should be initiated as early as possible, preferably within the
first 3 hours after onset of persistent chest pain, but some benefit may still be
derived if administered up to even 12 hours (if pain persists with ST elevation).
Eligibility for thrombolytic therapy
• Chest pain of >30 min and < 12 hrs
• ST segment elevation of > 1.0 mV in two continuous ECG leads indicative of
AMI
Ministry of Health and Quality of Life/Mauritius Institute of Health/World Health Organisation 43

[Page 44]
• New LBBB on ECG
Because fibrinolytic agents increase the risk of hemorrhage, including
intracerebral hemorrhage, several cautions and contraindications must be
considered before treatment can be initiated. These are:
A. Absolute contraindications:
• Active internal bleeding
• Suspected aortic dissection
• Known intracranial neoplasm
• History of any haemorragic CVA ever
• Or other cerebrovascular event during the past 1 year
B. Relative contraindications:
• Severe hypertension on presentation (BP > 180/110 mm.Hg.)
• History of chronic severe hypertension
• History of prior CVA or other intracranial pathology
• Recent trauma (< 2 weeks) or major surgery (< 3 weeks)
• Prolonged or traumatic CPR (> 10 min)
• Non-compressible vascular punctures
• Recent internal bleeding (< 2-45 weeks)
• Known bleeding diathesis or current INR > 2-3
• For streptokinase- prior exposure or known allergy
Primary Percutaneous Coronary Intervention
Primary percutaneous coronary intervention (PCI) can serve as an alternative to
thrombolysis only if performed in a timely fashion by individuals skilled in the
procedure and supported by experienced personnel in high-volume centers .
Indications include patients with contraindications to thrombolysis, patients at risk
for bleeding, and patients with cardiogenic shock
Ministry of Health and Quality of Life/Mauritius Institute of Health/World Health Organisation 44

[Page 45 — context]
Adjunctive Therapy
Platelet antiaggregants.
Early adjunctive therapy with thrombolysis consists of aspirin, which quickly
prevents thromboxane A2 production in platelets and prostacyclin in endothelial
cells. Aspirin should be administered at the time of admission to the emergency
ward at a dose of 150 to 300 mg, preferably in a chewable form because of its
faster absorption, followed by a daily administration indefinitely thereafter.
In case of true aspirin allergy, dipyridamole or ticlopidine may be used.
Heparin (which forms a complex with antithrombin III, thus inactivating
thrombin) is recommended in patients with large or anterior MI, known left
ventricular thrombus, or previous embolic events. In patients not treated with
thrombolytic therapy or with nonselected thrombolytics (streptokinase,
anistreplase, urokinase), and in patients without increased risk for systemic
emboli, subcutaneous administration of 7500 U (or 1 mg/kg of enoxaparin) twice
daily may be administered . Prolonged intravenous heparin therapy has not been
shown to decrease the rate of reocclusion.
β-Adrenergic blockers are known to reduce myocardial oxygen consumption, as
well as acute and long-term mortality and morbidity, and should be administered
intravenously as early as possible (on day 1 within 12 hours) followed by oral
therapy if contraindications are excluded. Furthermore, β-blockers may reduce
infarct size and the incidence of ventricular fibrillation and reinfarction.
ACE inhibitors should be initiated on day 1 within hours of hospitalization in
patients with evolving acute MI with ST-segment elevation or left bundle branch
block and continued indefinitely in case of impaired left ventricular function (the
lower the ejection fraction, the greater the benefit).
Ministry of Health and Quality of Life/Mauritius Institute of Health/World Health Organisation 45

[Page 47]
For bradyarrhythmia and heart block, either intravenous atropine or temporary
transvenous (or, in some cases, transcutaneous) pacing is recommended.
Indications for pacing are symptomatic bradycardia (less than 50 beats per
minute) with symptoms of hypotension not responding to atropine; asystole;
bilateral bundle branch block; newly developed or indeterminate bifascicular
block with first-degree AV block; second-degree symptomatic or Mobitz type II
AV block, advanced (complete) AV-block; and incessant ventricular tachycardia,
which requires atrial or ventricular overdrive pacing.
Atrial fibrillation is often transient and may be associated with heart failure, atrial
ischemia, or pericarditis. It should be treated by either electric cardioversion in
patients with hemodynamic instability or ischemia; or by rapid digitalization, β-
blockade in patients without contraindications, diltiazem or verapamil, and
heparin to avoid embolic events.
Hemodynamic and Mechanical Complications
Congestive heart failure may result from systolic contractile dysfunction due to
large necrotic areas or to postischaemic contractile wall motion abnormalities
(stunned myocardium). Mechanical complications that worsen cardiac function
include myocardial infarct expansion and aneurysm formation, ruptured
ventricle, ventricular septal defect, papillary muscle dysfunction and rupture. The
primary symptom is dyspnea, caused by pulmonary congestion and tachycardia.
Therapy for congestive heart failure should be initiated with diuretics
(furosemide, 20 mg intravenously, which may be repeated), nitrates, and oxygen,
followed by positive inotropic agents (dobutamine, 2 to 20 µg/kg/min; dopamine
2 to 10 µg/kg/min intravenously).
In case of severe ventricular dysfunction or cardiogenic shock, a Swan-Ganz
pulmonary artery catheter for measurements of cardiac output, pulmonary artery
capillary wedge pressure pulmonary and systemic resistances may be placed.
Ministry of Health and Quality of Life/Mauritius Institute of Health/World Health Organisation 47

[Page 48]
6.2.5 Follow-up and Rehabilitation
1. Follow-up
In all patients following myocardial infarction without contraindications, long-
term treatment with aspirin and β-adrenergic blockers is recommended .
Recurrent angina should be treated with intravenous nitroglycerin, aspirin,
heparin, analgesics, and β-blockers.
ACE inhibitors should be a part of secondary prevention in patients with left
ventricular dysfunction.
Calcium antagonists are not routinely recommended after infarction but may be
selectively prescribed in patients with specific indications such as hypertension or
angina in the presence of preserved left ventricular function.
Carvedilol has been shown to attenuate ventricular remodeling in patients with
left ventricular dysfunction after MI, but its long-term effects need to be
investigated further.
Ministry of Health and Quality of Life/Mauritius Institute of Health/World Health Organisation 48

[Page 49 — context]
Table 6: Long-term therapy and secondary prevention after myocardial infarction
Treatment
Drug therapy Comments
Aspirin In all patients without contraindications
β-Blockers In all patients without contraindications
ACE inhibitors In patients with left ventricular dysfunction
Dietary therapy Low saturated fats and cholesterol
Weight-reduction
and exercise in overweight patients
Lipid-lowering drugs If LDL cholesterol > 100 mg/dL,
HDL cholesterol < 35 mg/dL, triglycerides > 400
mg/dL
2. Rehabilitation after MI
Physical activity should be progressively advanced in stable patients. Before
discharge from the hospital patients should receive verbal and if possible written
instructions concerning physical activities, medications, diet, and secondary
preventive measures.
Rehabilitation should concern all facets of patient’s activities: physical,
psychological, emotional, socioeconomic, life-style changes, risk factors
management, smoking cessation, education, return to work (if feasible), self-
control, knowledge of limitations etc.
Ministry of Health and Quality of Life/Mauritius Institute of Health/World Health Organisation 49

[Page 55]
1. 1 INTRODUCTION AND RATIONALE
Worldwide, the mortality from cardiovascular disease is projected to rise from
13.2 million in 1985 to 24.5 million, an 85% increase in three decades. This
indication has led the World Health Organisation to term coronary heart disease
as the ‘World’s public health enemy number 1’. By 2015, the increase in
cardiovascular deaths will be more than double in developing nations, jumping
from 72 million to 167 million, or by 132 percent increase in thirty years, while
mortality in industrialized nations will rise by 28 percent. This means that
coronary artery disease will become the leading killer in both developing and
developed country.
Coronary artery disease has also been identified as the primary non-
communicable health problem in Mauritius, accounting for nearly one-third
deaths in Mauritius. It has a profound and adverse impact on household, families
and society and is a major contributor to morbidity, invalidity and mortality.
Pharmacological approaches, intensive care units, coronary angioplasty and
bypass surgery can reduce modality from coronary heart disease by one third.
However, two third of the decline is credited to measures such a healthy diets,
exercise and smoking cessation, optimum control of blood pressure and a normo-
glycemic level of glucose. Premature death of Mauritians can be avoided and
quality of life improved if a comprehensive risk factors intervention program for
CAD can be implemented at the primary health care level, widely perceived to be
the backbone of a rational health service system.
1.2 DEFINITION OF PRIMARY PREVENTION
Primary prevention refers to guidance given to persons with no known
cardiovascular disease. The first goal of prevention is to prevent the development
Ministry of Health and Quality of Life/Mauritius Institute of Health/World Health Organisation 55

[Page 56 — context]
of risk factors. The primary care physicians should regularly check for smoking,
physical inactivity, elevated lipid levels, elevated blood sugar, high blood
pressure and eating habits and other environmental hygiene factors.
1.3 OBJECTIVES OF CORONARY ARTERY DISEASE PREVENTION
The objectives of a coronary artery disease prevention program at the first level of
contact of a health system are to:
a. Remain free from coronary heart diseases and enjoy an improved quality of
life.
b. Reduce the risk of coronary heart disease events and thereby reduce premature
disability, mortality and extend overall survival.
c. Decrease the need for interventional procedures such as angioplasty, bypass
grafting and thereby decreasing hospital costs.
d. Reduce the incidence of subsequent myocardial infarctions
1.9 PRINCIPLES OF SCREENING FOR CORONARY ARTERY DISEASE
RISK FACTORS:
A coronary artery disease prevention program must meet a number of criteria
before it can be used in the general population. These criteria include:
1. Coronary heart disease is a serious public health problem.
2. Techniques for risk factor detection are easy, precise, cost-effective and
acceptable to the community.
3. There is a defined screening strategy and a defined intervention and
follow-up policy.
4. Trained staff and facilities for screening and intervention are available.
5. Screening and intervention results in a reduction in clinical events,
including morbidity and mortality.
6. Screening has no adverse effects.
7. Cost of screening and intervention is justified in relation to the outcome.
Ministry of Health and Quality of Life/Mauritius Institute of Health/World Health Organisation 56

[Page 58]
DIABETES MELLITUS AND IMPAIRED GLUCOSE TOLERANCE
PREVALENCE NATIONAL SURVEYS 87/92/98 IN ADULTS AGED 25 AND
ABOVE
87 92 98
MEN
DM Prevalence % 14.2 16.3 20.8
IGT Prevalence % 15.6 14.9 11.8
WOMEN
DM Prevalence % 14.5 17.4 20.6
IGT Prevalence % 22.5 19.3 20.2
PREVALENCE OF HYPERTENSION IN ADULTS AGED 25 AND ABOVE
87 92 98
MEN 31.7 26.5 30.0
WOMEN 30.2 26.2 29.6
1.6 DEFINITION OF RISK FACTOR
The term risk factor describes those “characteristics found in healthy individuals
to be independently related to the subsequent occurrence of coronary heart disease
and, where modifiable, to be reversible.’ For example, cholesterol is an
independent risk factor for coronary heart disease. Epidemiological and
evidence-based studies have shown that cholesterol lowering by one percent is
associated with a decrease in the risk of coronary heart disease of about 2%.
There is overwhelming scientific evidence that lifestyle modification and risk
factor reduction can retard the development of coronary heart disease both before
and after the occurrence of a clinical event. Previously undue emphasis was
placed on individually high risk factors rather than the overall level of risk based
on a combination of risk factors. A multifactorial assessment of coronary heart
disease acknowledges 3 important facts:
Ministry of Health and Quality of Life/Mauritius Institute of Health/World Health Organisation 58

[Page 59]
1. Coronary heart disease has a multifactorial aetiology
2. Risk factors have a multiplicative effect.
3. As physicians, we are dealing with the whole person (holistic view),
not isolated risk factors.
LIFESTYLE AND CHARACTERISTICS ASSOCIATED WITH INCREASED
RISK OF FUTURE CHD EVENTS
Lifestyles Modifiable characteristics Non-modificable
characteristics
Diet high in saturated fat, Elevated blood pressure Age
cholesterol and calories
Tobacco smoking Elevated plasma Total cholesterol Sex
LDL cholesterol Post menopause
Low HDL cholesterol
Elevated plasma TG
Excess alcohol consumption Diabetes
Sedentary life Obesity Family history of
Sustained psycho-emotional Thrombogenic factor ? CHD at early age
stress Male < 55 yrs
Females < 65 yrs
1.7 PRIORITIZATION FOR CORONARY HEART DISEASE PREVENTION
Primary prevention activities for coronary heart disease should be downsized and
prioritized under the following targeted groups:
a. Patients with established coronary heart disease should be given first priority
for prevention as they are at high risk of fatal and non-fatal complications of
their disease.
b. Next priority should be given to individuals in the general population who are
at high risk of developing coronary heart disease.
Ministry of Health and Quality of Life/Mauritius Institute of Health/World Health Organisation 59

[Page 60]
c. Third priority for prevention is close relatives of patients with very early onset
of coronary heart disease particularly the first-degree blood relatives of
patients.
d. Increasing age, ethnicity, socially economically deprived communities,
geographical regions are other variables to be considered for primary
prevention.
1.8 SCIENTIFIC BASIS FOR RISK FACTOR MODIFICATION
Unifactorial randomized control trials of diet; blood pressure and cholesterol
lowering have shown reductions in cardiovascular morbidity and mortality.
However, the WHO collaborating group study has confirmed that the multi
factorial intervention is more cost effective in modifying the risk factors of CAD.
Ministry of Health and Quality of Life/Mauritius Institute of Health/World Health Organisation 60

[Page 61]
A. DIET
Diet is a determinant of CAD. Its effect on the development of atherosclerosis is
mediated through the influence of biological risk factors e.g. LDL, HDL, BP,
obesity, diabetes and hypertension.
A healthy diet is characterized as:
1. Low in saturated fatty acids
2. High in unsaturated fatty acids
3. Rich in complex carbohydrates
The traditional Mediterranean diet (low saturated fat + high unsaturated fat
especially monounsaturated) and Japanese diet (low saturated fat + high complex
carbohydrates) are associated with the best life expectancy in the world. The
physician’s training does not encompass aspects of dietary counseling. Therefore,
assistance from a dietician or a specially trained nurse for dietary interviews is of
considerable value.
B. OBESITY
Obesity can be assessed by three measures mainly:
a. Body mass index
b. Waist hip ratio
c. Waist circumference
a. Body mass index
Body weight is expressed in terms of BMl. It is calculated as weight in kg
/ height (in m2) squared and is recommended by the WHO expert
committee for assessing degree of obesity as shown in the table below.
Ministry of Health and Quality of Life/Mauritius Institute of Health/World Health Organisation 61

[Page 62]
ASSESSMENT OF OBESITY USING BODY MASS INDEX
Body mass index (kg/m2) WHO classification Popular description
< 18.5 Underweight Thin
18.5 – 24.9 Normal weight Normal weight
25.0 – 29.9 Grade 1 overweight Overweight
30.0 – 39.9 Grade 2 overweight Obese
> 40.0 Grade 3 overweight Morbidity obese
b. Waist hip ratio
The ratio of hip to waist circumference is also widely used in
epidemiology as an index of central obesity. Central obesity with the
accumulation of fat to the trunk and abdominal cavity is associated with
high prevalence of lipid abnormalities, hypertension and abnormal glucose
tolerance and insulin resistance leading to increased coronary artery
disease. The normal value of waist hip ratio should not be greater than 1.
c. Waist circumference
There is also good evidence from population based studies that waist
circumference is also a useful index of obesity. Measurement of waist
circumference (one measurement and no calculation with the person
standing), midway between the lowest rib and the iliac crest, is also
recommended for clinical assessment of the degree of obesity and follow
up during weight reduction.
Ministry of Health and Quality of Life/Mauritius Institute of Health/World Health Organisation 62

[Page 63 — context]
ACTION LEVELS FOR WAIST CIRCUMFERENCE IN MEN & WOMEN
Non-obese Action level Action Level 2
(Alerting zone) (Professional advice
needed)
Men < 94 cm 94 – 101 cm > 102 cm
Women < 80 cm 80 – 87 cm > 88 cm
C. SMOKING
The health hazards of smoking are well documented. Smoking is responsible for
50% of all avoidable deaths and one half of these are due to cardiovascular death.
The risk of future cardiovascular death is particularly high if smoking starts
before the age of 15. Passive smoking also increases the risk of cardiovascular
disease. According to WHO estimates, annual premature adult mortality among
males in developed countries due to smoking is 800,000 per year. Of this total,
300,000, (40%) occur due to cardiovascular disease.
SMOKING PATTERN ACROSS DEVELOPED & DEVELOPING COUNTRIES
Global Developed countries Developing countries
Men 48% 41% 50%
Women 12% 21% 8%
D. ALCOHOL
Alcohol consumption shows a J-shaped OR U-shaped relationship to the risk of
all cause mortality. Moderate use of alcohol (10 – 30 g of ethanol per day for
men and 10 – 20 g for women) is considered safe. Safe drinking levels increase
Ministry of Health and Quality of Life/Mauritius Institute of Health/World Health Organisation 63

[Page 67]
G. BLOOD PRESSURE
Many epidemiological studies have demonstrated the importance of elevated
blood pressure as a risk for coronary heart disease in both men and women. The
decision to start drug therapy depends not only on the grading of blood pressure
level but also on the overall cardiovascular risk which calls for a proper history,
physical examination and laboratory examinations to identify the:
1. Presence of cardiovascular disease
2. Coexistence of risk factors
3. Incidence of target organ damage
Blood pressure should be lowered slowly and carefully because myocardial
necrosis, coronary atherosclerosis and cardiac hypertrophy may render coronary
autoregulation less effective in preserving organ perfusion when blood pressure is
reduced too rapidly.
(Refer to hypertension guidelines)
H. DIABETES
Type 1 and type 2 diabetes are associated with a marked increase of CHD. The
excess cardiovascular risk associated with type 1 diabetes becomes evident after
the age of 30. Type 2 diabetes is associated with more profound abnormalities in
cardiovascular risk factors than type 1 diabetes. Even IGT is associated with a
cardiovascular risk pattern characteristic of type 2 diabetes namely high
triglyceride level, low HDL value, increased value of hypertension and
hyperinsulinemia. The Diabetes Complication and Control Trial (DCCT) showed
that glucose control is important for the prevention of long term complications.
(Refer to Diabetes Guidelines)
Ministry of Health and Quality of Life/Mauritius Institute of Health/World Health Organisation 67

[Page 68 — context]
MODEL FOR PRIMARY AND SECONDARY PREVENTION PROGRAM FOR
NCD
Primary Prevention Secondary Prevention
P Community I
R Education Detection of Surveillance N
I (Population) New Cases of old case T
M E
A R
R V
Y E
N
Early Improved T
Treatment Treatment I
P O
R N
E
V C
E Modified
N Environment Family/ O
T & Lifestyle Community Decreased Complications
I (Population) Awareness N
O
N T
Patient Education R
O
L
NCD
Complications
Ministry of Health and Quality of Life/Mauritius Institute of Health/World Health Organisation 68

[Page 69]
GUIDE TO COMPREHENSIVE RISK FACTOR REDUCTION FOR PATIENTS
WITH CARDIOVASCULAR DISEASE
NO. RISK INTERVENTION RECOMMENDATION
1. Smoking goal : complete Strongly encourage patient and family to stop
cessation smoking. Provide counseling, nicotine replacement,
group cessation program
2. Physical activity Encourage minimum 30-60 mins, moderate intensity
Minimum goal 30 mins 3-4 exercise 3-4 times/week (walking, jogging, cycling
X/week etc) maximum benefit 5-6 hours per week. Advise
medically supervised program for moderate to high
risk patient
3. Weight management Intensive diet and appropriate physical activity
intervention. Emphasize need for weight loss in
patients with HBP, increased TG & glucose levels
4. Blood pressure control Initiate lifestyle modification (weight control,
Goal equal or less than 140/90 physical activities, alcohol moderation, moderate
mmHg sodium restriction)
Add antihypertensive drug individualized to patient
requirements if BP is more than 140/90, consistently
raised for three months or if initial BP more than
160/100 mmHg
5. Diabetes management Appropriate OHA to achieve near normal FPG.
Euglycemic control Treatment of other risks (e.g. exercise, management,
BP and cholesterol management)
6. Oestrogen Consider oestrogen replacement therapy in all post
memopausal women especially those with multiple
CHD risk factors.
Individualise treatment
7. Antiplatelets Start ASA 75 to 300 mg if no contra indication.
agents/anticoagulants Manage warfarin to international normalized ratio 2
to 3.5 for post MI not able to take aspirin
Ministry of Health and Quality of Life/Mauritius Institute of Health/World Health Organisation 69

[Page 70 — context]
NO. RISK INTERVENTION RECOMMENDATION
8. Lipid management Diet < 30 % fat, < 7% saturated fat, < 200 mg/day
Primary goal cholesterol
LDL < 100 mg/ dl Assess fasting lipid profile. Post MI patient – 4 to 6
Secondary goal weeks to stabilize. Add drug therapy according to
HDL > 35 mg/dl following guide :
Tg < 200 mg/dl
LDL < LDL 100- LDL > 130 HDL < 35
100 mg/dl 130 mg/dl mg/dl mg/dl
No drug Consider Add drug Emphasize
therapy therapy to treatment to weight
Follow up diet as diet as follows management,
every 5 follows physical
years activity, quit
smoking,
increased
fruit
consumption
Suggested drug therapy
Tg < Tg Tg > 400
200 200- mg/dl
mg/dl 400
mg/dl
Combined
Statin Statin treatment
fibrate
niacin +
Niacin Niacin statin
If LDL goal not achieved,
consider combination
therapy
Ministry of Health and Quality of Life/Mauritius Institute of Health/World Health Organisation 70

[Page 73]
REFERENCES
1. Is primary care essential? Barbara Starfleld. The Lancet. Vol 344. October 22
1994.
2. Prevention of coronary heart disease in clinical practice. Task Force Report.
Prepared by David Wood et al. European Heart Journal (1998) 19, 1434 – 1503.
3. Guide to primary prevention of cardiovascular disease. A statement for Health
Care professional. From the Task Force on Risk Reduction. PREPARED BY Scot
M et al.
4. How to implement physical activity in primary and secondary prevention.
American Heart Association. Gerald F Fletcher. AHA Medical/ Scientific
Statement.
5. Mauritius Non Communicable Disease Surveys 87/92.
6. Mauritius Non Communicable Disease Surveys 98. A preliminary report.
7. National Health Statistic 1999.
8. 1999 World Health Organisation - International Society of hypertension. Journal
of hypertension 1999, 17: 151 – 183.
9. Epidemic of Cardiovascular Disease in post communist countries. Heart beat
number 3, September 1995. Journal of International society and federation of
cardiology.
10. Asian medical Journal. Vol 14 number 9, September 1997 Counter measures for
smoking cessation.
Ministry of Health and Quality of Life/Mauritius Institute of Health/World Health Organisation 73

[Page 74]
11. Control of cardiovascular disease in developing countries – research, development
and institutional strengthening. Chrostopher P Housen et al. Bulletin of World
Health Federation. Number 1. March 1999.
12. Physical Activity for healthy adults as a primary prevention intervention in the
clinical setting. Sally S Haris et al. JAMA, June 23/30 - 1999 vol 261 number 24.
13. Physical exercise in the management of hypertension. Kikua Arakawa - Asian
Medical Journal. Vol 43. number 3- 107- 111, March 2000.
Ministry of Health and Quality of Life/Mauritius Institute of Health/World Health Organisation 74

[Page 75 — context]
Behavioural change
Procjaska and Diclemente have proposed a ‘stages of change’ model (387-388)
which argues that everyone is not equally ready to change their behaviour at a
given point in time even if they have all been invited to have screening and risk
factor modification. They maintain that it is important to assess the individual’s
behaviour thoughts, attitudes and beliefs concerning their perceived ability to
change, their behaviour over the past 6 months as well as the environmental
context in which they will attempt to change, and maintain the lifestyle change.
Five stages are proposed: pre-contemplation, contemplation, preparation action
and maintenance. In the pre-contemplation stage, individuals do not intend to
change their high-risk behaviour in the foreseeable future i.e over the next 6
months. Individuals can be in this stage because:
(a) they are unaware of the long-term consequences of their behaviour
(b) they are discouraged about their ability to change and do not want to think
about it
(c) they are defensive due to social pressure to change. Pre-contemplation is a
very stable stage. As a group they evaluate the pros of their risk behaviour as
greater than the cons.
Contemplation is the stage where people seriously intend to change their
behaviour within the next 6 months. Despite their intentions, however, they
typically stay in this stage for long periods of time, e.g. 2 years or more. They talk
about change, but keep putting it off. Those who substitute thinking for acting are
called chronic contemplators. Contemplators evaluate the pros and cons of their
behaviour as about equal; hence there is considerable ambivalence about
changing.
Ministry of Health and Quality of Life/Mauritius Institute of Health/World Health Organisation 75